Scientific management is a philosophy devised by Frederick Winslow Taylor, whose aim was to engender the output of different organisations by balancing efficiency, effectiveness and equity. 

As one of the most influential managers of all time, he has increased the productivity of several industries to an extent that was never achieved nor dreamed of anteriorly. His very systematic approach consisted of punctilious records of the work done, a rigorous selection of workmen, special training aiming to develop the skills of the labourers, a clear separation between management and the workforce and a heartily cooperation. This was achieved via intimate, shoulder to shoulder contact and assistance, incentives and opportunities for people to improve their abilities, fair compensation for the work carried out, openness to suggestions and much more. Previous management is considered by him antediluvian, exhibiting various flaws such as lack of aid from leaders, poor scheduling that leads to exhaustion and subsequently inefficiency and ineffectiveness, or lack of opportunities to stimulate and reward employees. Close observation and in-depth research allowed him to supersede the management system and ultimately to inspire a new way of thinking among people of all classes. Previously antagonistic objectives of employers and employees are now matching, all working towards the prosperity of the organisation.

Unfairly considered to be the founder of the purest form of the "machine-style management" (i.e. perceived as dehumanizing and treating the workforce as machines overseen by engineers - managers), his philosophy gravitates towards friendly and intimate cooperation, equity and respect and a closeness to the workforce, protecting it from overworking as well as stimulating it with incentives, dividends, and support. Later investigations in the theory and practice of management, such as the Hawthorne studies, revealed that showing an interest in people's work will stimulate them and increase the productivity, while F.W. Taylor has foreseen this and acted accordingly, installing a modern management style for the sake of the welfare of the organisation as well as of the society. 

His scientific and systematic approaches enabled him to detect and resolve many of the problems encountered as well as to ensure the prosperous future and to prevent crises or strikes by equilibrating the amount of work and the recompenses given. Reducing hours, increasing wages, inserting breaks and introducing new rewards are just a few examples of the techniques used by him to stimulate the workforce to produce more and to earn more, for the benefit of both the employer and the employee. In the end of the book, he emphasises the importance of the gradual shift to scientific management, as delicacy is crucial in this respect. A brusque transition had proven to be perilous and even catastrophic, creating even worse conditions than before. The process was considered by him to take between three to five years at that time, although now people may be ready to undertake it much faster and smoother than ever before. The principles are whatsoever still relevant, encompassing the development of a science which is meant to yield the theoretical aspects needed, the careful selection, division, preparation and direction of labourers, strong cooperation and contact between members and equity in terms of responsibilities. 

While the language is not flamboyant, the book makes its point, the author presenting the existent problems, proposing solutions and providing concrete examples from his own experience. His striking achievements are validating his theory, this book being voted by the Academy of Management as the most influential management book of the twentieth century (Bedeian, Arthur G.; Wren, Daniel A. - 2001. "Most Influential Management Books of the 20th Century").
